---
authors: ['García-Mendívil, H.A.']
publisher: "Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya"
abstract: "Sandía, Citrullus lanatus var. Lanatus y la berenjena, Solanum melongena, son dos cultivos comúnmente injertados en portainjertos resistentes para controlar las enfermedades transmitidas por el suelo. Sin embargo, actualmente no hay portainjertos disponibles comercialmente resistentes a Meloidogyne para cultivos de cucurbitáceas, y también una estrecha diversidad para cultivos frutales solanáceos. El objetivo principal de esta tesis fue determinar la durabilidad de la resistencia a Meloidogyne de Citrullus amarus y Solanum torvum como posibles portainjertos para sandía y berenjena, respectivamente. La respuesta de dos accesiones de C. amarus, BGV0005164 (CI64) y BGV0005167 (CI67), y de los cultivares de portainjertos de S. torvum cv. Brutus (TB), Espina, Salutamu y Torpedo contra aislados de Meloidogyne de España, incluyendo algunos de M. javanica (MJAV) (a)virulentos al gen 1.2 (a), y un aislado de M. incognita (MINC) virulento al gen N, se evaluó en experimentos de maceta, y contra MINC en experimentos de invernadero de plástico. La sandía cv. Sugar baby (SB) y la berenjena cv. Cristal (MC) se incluyeron como control. La tasa de crecimiento de la población y el nivel de resistencia de los cuatro cultivares de S. torvum contra el MINC se evaluaron en condiciones de invernadero de plástico en dos temporadas de cultivo. SB sin injertar e injertado en accesiones de CI, se sometieron a densidades crecientes de MJAV y MINC, y MC en TB de MJAV, para determinar los parámetros dinámicos de población y la productividad en experimentos en macetas. En condiciones de invernadero de plástico, SB sin injertar e injertada en ambas accesiones de CI y MC en TB se cultivaron durante dos años consecutivos en las mismas parcelas para evaluar el nivel de resistencia al MINC y el rendimiento del cultivo. Después del segundo cultivo, la posible selección de virulencia en la subpoblación de nematodos originada en las plantas no injertadas e injertadas se evaluó en experimentos en macetas. Ambas accesiones de C. amarus fueron resistentes a M. arenaria, y desde altamente a moderadamente resistentes a MINC y MJAV en experimentos con macetas. En el experimento del invernadero de plástico, ambas accesiones se desempeñaron como resistentes a MINC. La tasa máxima de multiplicación (a), la densidad de población máxima (M) y los valores de densidad de equilibrio (E) de ambas especies de Meloidogyne fueron menores en sandía injertada que en no injertada. En el experimento de invernadero, el índice de agallas (GI) y el número de huevos por planta fue mayor en plantas no injertadas que en injertadas en ambos años. Las accesiones CI se comportaron desde altamente resistente a resistente a MINC y tuvieron mayor producción que las no injertadas en ambos años. Dos cultivos consecutivos de sandía injertada no seleccionaron virulencia pero tuvieron un costo de aptitud infecciosa y reproductiva en el nematodo. Todos los portainjertos de S. torvum respondieron como resistentes a MINC y desde altamente resistentes a susceptibles contra MJAV. La tasa de crecimiento de la población de MINC en berenjenas no injertadas fue mayor que la de la injertada en ambas temporadas de cultivo. Los valores de a y E de MJAV fueron menores en la berenjena injertada que en no injertada. La berenjena injertada fue tolerante al rango de densidades de nematodos evaluado pero la no injertada no. En el experimento de invernadero, el GI y la densidad de nematodos en el suelo y en raíces fueron mayores en las plantas no injertadas que en las injertadas en ambos años. La berenjena injertada se desempeñó como resistente en 2017 y altamente resistente en 2018. El rendimiento de la berenjena no difirió independientemente del injerto cuando se cultivó durante 4.5 meses, pero sí cuando se cultivó durante 8.3 meses..."
isbn: "978-1-311-04245-3"
copyright: "All rights reserved"
title: "Durability of resistance to Meloidogyne mediated by R-genes in solanaceous and cucurbitaceous crops"
ENTRYTYPE: "book"
enableToc: False
enableWhoami: True
pinned: true
publishDate: "2019-10-29"
---
<style>
body {
text-align: justify}
</style>

<p><strong>Abstract</strong></p>
<hr />
<p>The response of two <em>Citrullus amarus</em> accessions, BGV0005164 and BGV0005167, was assessed against different <em>Meloidogyne arenaria</em>, <em>Meloidogyne incognita</em>, and <em>Meloidogyne javanica</em> isolates in pot experiments and against <em>M. incognita</em> in plastic greenhouse. In the pot experiments, plants were inoculated with a second-stage juvenile per cm<sup>3</sup> of sterile sand and maintained in a growth chamber at 25 C for 50 days. The watermelon cv. Sugar Baby was included as a susceptible control for comparison. At the end of the experiments, the number of egg masses and eggs per plant was determined, and the reproduction index was calculated as the percentage of the number of eggs produced in the <em>C. amarus</em> accessions with regard to that produced in the susceptible cv. Sugar Baby. In the plastic greenhouse experiment, the ungrafted watermelon cv. Sugar Baby and watermelons grafted onto each of the <em>C. amarus</em> accessions and onto the watermelon rootstock cv. Robusta were cultivated from May to August 2016 in plots with nematode densities from 46 to 1392 J2 per 250 cm<sup>3</sup> of soil at transplantation. At the end of the experiment, the galling index and the number of eggs per plant were determined, and the reproduction index was calculated. Additionally, the compatibility of the two accessions with the watermelon cv. Sugar Baby and the effect on fruit quality (weight, size, shape, firmness, pH, total soluble solids, and flesh color) were assessed under a hydroponic system in a greenhouse. The commercial rootstocks cv. Cobalt and cv. Robusta were also included. All the <em>Meloidogyne</em> isolates produced less egg masses and eggs per plant on the accessions than on Sugar Baby. Both accessions performed as resistant against <em>M. arenaria</em>, and from highly to moderately resistant to <em>M. incognita</em> and <em>M. javanica</em> in pot experiments. In the plastic greenhouse experiment, both <em>C. amarus</em> accessions performed as resistant to <em>M. incognita</em>. Both <em>C. amarus</em> accessions were compatible with the watermelon cv. Sugar Baby, but only the BGV0005167 accession did not influence the fruit quality. Then, the BGV0005167 accession is a promising rootstock for managing the three tropical root-knot nematode species without influencing watermelon fruit quality.</p>
<hr />
<p>The response of ungrafted and grafted watermelon cv. Sugar baby onto the <em>C. amarus</em> accessions BGV0005164 and BGV0005167 submitted to increasing densities of <em>M. incognita</em> and <em>M. javanica</em> was studied in pot experiments to determine the maximum multiplication rate, the maximum population density and the equilibrium density of the root-knot nematode species and the effect on shoot dry biomass of watermelon. In plastic greenhouse conditions, the ungrafted and grafted watermelon onto both <em>C. amarus</em> accessions, and onto the <em>C. lanatus</em> rootstock cv. Robusta were cultivated for two consecutive years in the same plots to assess the level of resistance to <em>M. incognita</em> and crop yield. Additionally, after the second crop, the putative selection for virulence in the nematode subpopulation originated in the ungrafted and grafted watermelon was assessed in pot experiments. The maximum multiplication rate, the maximum population density and the equilibrium density values of both <em>Meloidogyne</em> species were lower in grafted than ungrafted watermelon. In the plastic greenhouse experiment, the nematode densities in soil at transplantation ranged from 1 to 53 J2 per 100 cm<math display="inline" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><msup><mi></mi><mn>3</mn></msup><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">^{3}</annotation></semantics></math> of soil in 2017 and did not differ between grafted and ungrafted watermelons. At the end of the crop, the galling index and the number of eggs per plant was higher in ungrafted than in grafted watermelon both years. The <em>C. amarus</em> accessions performed from highly resistant to resistant to <em>M. incognita</em>, and the rootstock cv. Robusta from moderately resistant in 2017 to slightly resistant in 2018. The repeated cultivation of grafted watermelon onto <em>C. amarus</em> accessions did not select for virulence. All grafted watermelons yielded more kg per plant than the ungrafted in both years. The results of this study highlight the poorer host status of CI64 and CI67 accessions to <em>M. incognita</em> and <em>M. javanica</em> compared to watermelon; the stability of the <em>C. amarus</em> resistance; and the beneficial effect of <em>C. amarus</em> on watermelon yield when cultivated in <em>Meloidogyne</em> infested soils.</p>
<hr />
<p>Several experiments were carried out to assess the performance of commercial <em>Solanum torvum</em> cultivars against the root knot nematodes <em>Meloidogyne incognita</em> and <em>M. javanica</em> in Spain. The response of <em>S. torvum</em> rootstock cultivars Brutus, Espina, Salutamu and Torpedo against <em>M. incognita</em> and <em>Mi1.2</em> (a)virulent <em>M. javanica</em> isolates was determined in pot experiments, and of ‘Brutus’ to an <em>N</em>-virulent isolate of <em>M. incognita</em>, compared with that of the eggplant <em>S. melongena</em> ‘Cristal.’ The relationship between the initial and final population densities of <em>M. javanica</em> on ungrafted and grafted ‘Cristal’ onto the <em>S. torvum</em> ‘Brutus’ was assessed, together with the effect on dry shoot biomass. Finally, the population growth rate and the resistance level of the four <em>S. torvum</em> cultivars against <em>M. incognita</em> was assessed under plastic greenhouse conditions in two cropping seasons. All <em>S. torvum</em> rootstocks responded as resistant to the <em>M. incognita</em> isolates and from highly resistant to susceptible against <em>M. javanica</em> isolates. The maximum multiplication rates of <em>M. javanica</em> on the ungrafted or grafted eggplant were 270 and 49, respectively, and the equilibrium densities were 1318 and 2056 eggs and J2 per 100 cm<math display="inline" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><msup><mi></mi><mn>3</mn></msup><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">^{3}</annotation></semantics></math> soil, respectively. The tolerance of the ungrafted eggplant was 10.9 J2 per 100 cm<math display="inline" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><msup><mi></mi><mn>3</mn></msup><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">^{3}</annotation></semantics></math> soil, and the minimum relative dry shoot biomass was 0.76. The population growth rate of <em>M. incognita</em> on eggplant cv. Cristal differed from that of the <em>S. torvum</em> cultivars in both cropping seasons. These results suggest that <em>S. torvum</em> is a valuable rootstock for managing the two <em>Meloidogyne</em> species irrespective of the (a)virulence status.</p>
<hr />
<p>The ungrafted and grafted eggplant, <em>Solanum melongena</em>, cv. Cristal onto the <em>S. torvum</em> rootstock cv. Brutus were cultivated for two consecutive years in the same plots in a plastic greenhouse to assess the level of resistance to <em>M. incognita</em> and crop yield. Moreover, at the end of the second crop, the putative selection for virulence of the nematode subpopulations comming infected ungrafted and grafted eggplant was assessed in the eggplant and the <em>S. torvum</em> in a pot experiment. Nematode population densities at transplantation in 2017 ranged from 2 to 378 J2 per 100 cm<math display="inline" xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML"><semantics><msup><mi></mi><mn>3</mn></msup><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">^{3}</annotation></semantics></math> of soil and did not differ between ungrafted and grafted eggplant. At the end of each crop, higher galling index and number of nematodes in soil and in roots were registered in ungrafted than grafted eggplant. The grafted eggplant performed as resistant in 2017 and as highly resistant in 2018. Eggplant yield did not differ irrespective of grafting in 2017 after being cultivated for 135 days, but it differed after 251 days of cultivation in 2018. In the pot experiment, <em>S. torvum</em> performed as resistant to both <em>M. incognita</em> subpopulations. However, the <em>M. incognita</em> subpopulation obtained from roots of <em>S. torvum</em> produced 49.4% less egg masses and 56% less eggs/plant in the eggplant than the nematode subpopulation obtained from roots of the eggplant cv. Cristal. The results of this study revealed that the infective and reproductive fitness of the nematode decrease without having been selected for virulence.</p>
